.. include:: subst.inc

Tutorial
========

SAPPHiRE simplifies data access, simulations and analysis for the `HiSPARC
<http://www.hisparc.nl>`_ experiment.  In this tutorial, we'll try to give
you a feeling for the things you can *do* with |sapphire|.  How can you
download data?  How can you analyze this data?  How can you produce
pulseheight histograms?  How can you calculate the direction of cosmic
rays?  This tutorial will only give you an overview of what's possible
with |sapphire|.  For details on all available classes and methods, please
see the :doc:`sapphire`.

.. note::
    We'll require you to know some basic Python.  If not, you can look at
    the official `Python tutorial <http://docs.python.org/2/tutorial/>`_.
    If you know how to start a Python interpreter, you can probably start
    best with chapter 3 and ignore chapter 2.  Chapters 3 through 6 should
    give you some working knowledge of Python.


First steps
-----------

In a few examples, we will plot the data which we have produced.  We make
use of pylab, which is included with matplotlib.  In OS X and Linux, you
can start an IPython terminal with pylab using::

    $ ipython --pylab

On Windows, where you're probably using Python(x,y), this should be the
default mode.

Whenever you see something like::

    >>> print 'Hello, world'
    Hello, world

it means we're typing in Python code.  The ``>>>`` is the Python *prompt*.
It tells you that the Python interpreter is waiting for you to give it
some instructions.  In the above example, we've typed in ``print 'Hello,
world'``.  The interpreter subsequently executed the code and printed
*Hello, world* on the screen.  Some further examples (try them, if you
like!)::

    >>> a = 2 + 2
    >>> 3 * a
    12

The first thing we'll have to do to start using |sapphire| is to *import*
the |sapphire| module::

    >>> import sapphire

There will be no output if everything is succesful.  It is easy to get
some help from inside the Python terminal.  Just say::

    >>> help(sapphire)

and you'll be presented with a basic help screen.  Instead of
``sapphire``, you can throw in modules, packages, functions, classes,
objects, etc.  Everything in Python has *some* help text associated with
it.  Not all of it is very helpful to a newcomer, hence this tutorial.
All help text is also available in the :doc:`sapphire`.


Downloading and accessing |hisparc| data
----------------------------------------

The |sapphire| package comprises multiple modules and packages.  To access
data from the public database, we'll have to import the ``publicdb``
module.  Also, we need the ``tables`` module to actually store the data.
`PyTables <pytables.org>`_ is based on the open HDF5 data format, which is
used by `many (research) institutes
<http://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/users5.html>`_.  For example, it is used by
the KNMI and by NASA.  To specify the date and time for which to download
the data, we need the ``datetime`` module.  Thus, we have::

    >>> import tables
    >>> import datetime
    >>> import sapphire.publicdb


Creating an empty data file, with the name ``mydata.h5``, is done easily::

    >>> data = tables.openFile('mydata.h5', 'w')

The ``'w'`` means *write*, which creates a file for writing (and reading).
Mind that this will create an empty file.  If there already was a file
with that name, it will be overwritten!  Alternatively, you can say
``'a'``, which means *append*, thus adding to an existing file without
overwriting its contents.  Finally, you can specify ``'r'`` for
*read-only*.


Downloading data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To download data, we have to specify the date/time *range*.  If we want to
download data from the December 1, 2012 all through December 2, 2012,
we can specify this by typing::

    >>> start = datetime.datetime(2012, 12, 1)
    >>> end = datetime.datetime(2012, 12, 3)

Mind that if we do not specify the hour of day, it is taken to be 00:00
hours.  Thus, there is no data included from December 3.  Alternatively,
we can download data from a two hour interval on December 14 by specifying
the hour of day::

    >>> start = datetime.datetime(2012, 12, 14, 19)
    >>> end = datetime.datetime(2012, 12, 14, 21)

which is from 19:00 to 21:00 hours.  It is important to realize that the
we use a GPS clock, which equal to UTC (up to leap seconds).  So, if we
download data for a station in the Netherlands, we have just said from
20:00 to 22:00 local time.  You can specify the time up to the seconds.

We have not actually done anything yet.  We have just stored our time
window in two arbitrarily-named variables, ``start`` and ``end``.  To
download data from station 501 and store it in a group with name ``s501``,
we can use the :func:`sapphire.publicdb.download_data` function::

    >>> sapphire.publicdb.download_data(data, '/s501', 501, start, end)
    INFO:hisparc.publicdb:2012-12-01 00:00:00 None
    INFO:hisparc.publicdb:Getting server data URL (2012-12-01 00:00:00)
    INFO:hisparc.publicdb:Downloading data...
    INFO:hisparc.publicdb:Storing data...
    INFO:hisparc.publicdb:Done.
    INFO:hisparc.publicdb:2012-12-02 00:00:00 None
    INFO:hisparc.publicdb:Getting server data URL (2012-12-02 00:00:00)
    INFO:hisparc.publicdb:Downloading data...
    INFO:hisparc.publicdb:Storing data...
    INFO:hisparc.publicdb:Done.

As you can see in the reference documentation of
:func:`sapphire.publicdb.download_data`, available by either clicking on
the link or typing in ``help(sapphire.publicdb.download_data)`` in the
interpreter, the function takes six arguments: *file, group, station_id,
start, end* and *get_blobs*.  The last one has the default argument
*False*, and may be omitted, as we have done here.  In our example, we
have opened a file, ``mydata.h5``, and have stored the file *handler* in
the variable ``data``.  So, we passed ``data`` to the function.  The group
name is ``/s501``.  Group names in PyTables are just like folders in a
directory hierarchy.  So, we might have specified
``/path/to/my/hisparc/data/files/for_station/s501``.  It is important to
note that this has absolutely nothing to do with *files*.  Whatever path
you specify, it is all contained *inside* your data file.  Since this is
just a small data file, we have opted for a simple structure.  At the
moment, just one group named ``s501`` at the root of the hierarchy.  Group
names must start with a letter, hence the ``s`` for station.

The *station_id* is simply the station number.  Here, we've chosen to
download data for station 501, located at Nikhef.  The *start* and *end*
parameters specify the date/time range.  Finally, *get_blobs* selects
whether binary data should be downloaded.  This includes the traces of
individual events, error messages, etc.  We've selected the default, which
is *False*.  Binary data is often not neccessary, and will increase the
data size tenfold.


Looking around
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you want to know what groups and tables are contained within the data
file, just ``print`` it::

    >>> print data
    mydata.h5 (File) ''
    Last modif.: 'Sat Dec 29 14:50:55 2012'
    Object Tree:
    / (RootGroup) ''
    /s501 (Group) 'Data group'
    /s501/events (Table(137600,)) 'HiSPARC coincidences table'
    /s501/weather (Table(51513,)) 'HiSPARC weather data'

The *object tree* gives an overview of all groups and tables.  As you can
see, the ``/s501`` group contains two tables, ``events`` and ``weather``.
The events table contains the data from the |hisparc| scintillators, while
the weather table contains data from the (optional) weather station.

To directly access any object in the hierarchy, you can make use of the
``data.root`` object, which points to the root group.  Then, just specify
the remaining path, with dots instead of slashes.  For example, to access
the events table::

    >>> print data.root.s501.events
    /s501/events (Table(137600,)) 'HiSPARC coincidences table'

Of course, we'd like to get some more information.  You can drop the print
statement, and just access the object directly.  PyTables is set up such
that it will give more detailed information whenever you specify the
object directly::

    >>> data.root.s501.events
    /s501/events (Table(137600,)) 'HiSPARC coincidences table'
      description := {
      "event_id": UInt32Col(shape=(), dflt=0, pos=0),
      "timestamp": Time32Col(shape=(), dflt=0, pos=1),
      "nanoseconds": UInt32Col(shape=(), dflt=0, pos=2),
      "ext_timestamp": UInt64Col(shape=(), dflt=0, pos=3),
      "data_reduction": BoolCol(shape=(), dflt=False, pos=4),
      "trigger_pattern": UInt32Col(shape=(), dflt=0, pos=5),
      "baseline": Int16Col(shape=(4,), dflt=-1, pos=6),
      "std_dev": Int16Col(shape=(4,), dflt=-1, pos=7),
      "n_peaks": Int16Col(shape=(4,), dflt=-1, pos=8),
      "pulseheights": Int16Col(shape=(4,), dflt=-1, pos=9),
      "integrals": Int32Col(shape=(4,), dflt=-1, pos=10),
      "traces": Int32Col(shape=(4,), dflt=-1, pos=11),
      "event_rate": Float32Col(shape=(), dflt=0.0, pos=12)}
      byteorder := 'little'
      chunkshape := (704,)

There you go!  But what does it all *mean*?  Well, if you want to get to
the bottom of it, read the `PyTables documentation
<http://pytables.github.com/usersguide/index.html>`_.  We'll give a quick
overview here.

First, this table contains 137600 rows.  In total, there are thirteen
columns: *event_id, timestamp, nanoseconds, ext_timestamp, data_reduction,
trigger_pattern, baseline, std_dev, n_peaks, pulseheights, integrals,
traces* and *event_rate*.

Each event has a unique [#event_id]_ identifier, ``event_id``.  Each event
has a Unix timestamp in GPS time, *not* UTC.  The sub-second part of the
timestamp is given in ``nanoseconds``.  The ``ext_timestamp`` is the full
timestamp in ns.  Since there cannot exist another event with the same
timestamp, this field in combination with the station number uniquely
identifies the event.  The ``data_reduction`` flag signifies whether the
full PMT trace (*no* reduction) has been stored, or just the PMT pulse
(*reduced*, or *zero suppression*).  The ``trigger_pattern`` is a binary
value containing the exact trigger condition at the time of the event.
The ``baseline``, ``std_dev``, ``n_peaks``, ``pulseheights`` and
``integrals`` fields are values derived from the PMT traces.  Each field
contains four values, one for each detector.  If a station only has two
detectors, the last two values for each field are -1.  If the baseline
cannot be determined, all these values are -999.  The ``event_rate`` is
the trigger rate at the time of the event.


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#event_id]

    Unique in this table.  When data is downloaded for analysis and
    combined with other data into one table, the ``event_id`` will be
    different.  To uniquely define an event, use a station number /
    ``ext_timestamp`` combination.
